[doc][netebpfext] Add proposal for async operations in netebpfext (#5189)
microsoft/ebpf-for-windows: docs/AsyncProcessing.md

# Async Processing (Pend/Complete) for eBPF Network Extensions

## Contents
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Design overview](#design-overview)
  - [Custom map for pend state](#custom-map-for-pend-state)
  - [Extension helper functions](#extension-helper-functions)
  - [Map key and value structures](#map-key-and-value-structures)
  - [Example eBPF program usage](#example-ebpf-program-usage)
- [PEND flow](#pend-flow)
- [COMPLETE flow](#complete-flow)
- [CONTINUE flow](#continue-flow)
- [Failure flows](#failure-flows)
- [Edge case and failure handling](#edge-case-and-failure-handling)
- [Internal pend state tracking](#internal-pend-state-tracking)
- [Multiple attached programs and PEND](#multiple-attached-programs-and-pend)
- [WFP implementation requirements](#wfp-implementation-requirements)
- [Per-layer async design](#per-layer-async-design)

>   - [AUTH_CONNECT / AUTH_RECV_ACCEPT](#auth_connect-auth_recv_accept)

Author: Fixed in 776961fb -- updated the TOC anchor to use the double dash that GitHub generates from the slash in the heading.

netebpfext currently have no way to express "pend this operation and
complete it later."

This proposal adds **pend/complete (async processing) support** to
netebpfext, enabling eBPF programs to:
1. **PEND** a network operation -- absorb a connection/packet while an
   external component makes a decision asynchronously.
2. **COMPLETE** the pended operation with a verdict (PERMIT, BLOCK, or
   CONTINUE -- re-invoke the program for continued evaluation; the
   program starts a fresh invocation, not a mid-execution resume).

The design is generic: any async orchestrator (kernel-mode driver, user-mode
service, or both) can integrate with pend/complete by interacting with
eBPF maps and optional BTF-resolved functions. No changes to the
async orchestrator's notification or decision-delivery mechanism are prescribed by
netebpfext itself.

## Requirements

### Functional requirements
1. An eBPF program attached to a supported WFP hook point (see
   [Supported WFP layers](#supported-wfp-layers)) must be able to
   pend the current network operation and return control to WFP.
2. An external async orchestrator must be able to complete the pended operation

>    with a verdict (PERMIT, BLOCK, or CONTINUE) at a later time.

Reviewer: Any constraints on "later"?  How do you prevent a buggy ebpf program from pending and never completing, thus consuming all resources?   Is there something the verifier can do to ensure safety?

Author: Good question. To be clear, there is no 100% guarantee here -- bounding completion latency is the async orchestrator's responsibility, by design. The extension provides backstops, not a guarantee:

1. The pend map is bounded by `max_entries`. Once full, `pend()` returns an error and the program must return a non-PEND verdict, so a buggy/stalled orchestrator degrades gracefully (no kernel resource exhaustion).
2. A per-entry stale-entry watchdog (driven by the timestamp recorded at pend time) reclaims entries whose orchestrator never came back.
3. There is no verifier check that proves `COMPLETE will eventually be called`, since that depends entirely on user-mode behavior; the verifier can't reason about it.

Added a forward-link from the requirement to Edge case 1 in 4228b62b so the design overview points readers at these backstops. Happy to add a more explicit verifier-side check if you have one in mind (e.g., 'program must call pend() before returning PEND').

Reviewer: If there is no guarantee, I'm afraid this will degrade the value of ebpf itself.  Would like to discuss this in a meeting.  I didn't quite understand the point "A per-entry stale-entry watchdog (driven by the timestamp recorded at pend time) reclaims entries whose orchestrator never came back".   If this is just saying that it's guarantee to complete within (say) 2 seconds, by failing (and cleaning up state) if not completed, then that would be a type of guarantee of safety.

Author: There was some offline feedback and I did a fairly significant rewrite. That being said, this was addressed. I have added in the proposal to include periodic removal of pended connections that persist beyond a certain timeout.

> 3. The CONTINUE verdict must re-invoke the eBPF program so it can

Reviewer: re-invoke when?  Immediately?  On the same CPU or can it be a different one?

Author: Updated the requirement (and added a [CONTINUE flow](#continue-flow) section) to clarify: re-invocation is asynchronous on a worker thread at PASSIVE_LEVEL (not synchronous inside the COMPLETE call) and is not pinned to the original classifyFn CPU.

pend lifecycle: loading the eBPF program, owning the pend map,
receiving pend notifications, making asynchronous decisions, driving
the COMPLETE path via map operations, and cleaning up stale entries.
The async orchestrator may be a single kernel-mode driver, a single
user-mode process, or a combination of both -- the architecture is
up to the integrator. See
[Async orchestrator integration guide](#async-orchestrator-integration-guide)
for details.

### Custom map for pend state
The design leverages the
[custom map](https://github.com/microsoft/ebpf-for-windows/pull/4882)
feature. Custom maps allow an eBPF extension to register as an NMR
provider for a custom map type and intercept CRUD operations on map
entries. The extension's callbacks are invoked **synchronously** and
**serialized per map** (ebpfcore acquires a per-map lock before invoking
the extension's callback) -- when the eBPF program inserts into the map,
the extension's `process_map_add_element` callback runs inline before
the call returns. Similarly, when a user-mode process updates or
deletes a map entry (via `bpf_map_update_elem` / `bpf_map_delete_elem`),

> the extension's callbacks are invoked synchronously through ebpfcore.

Author: Updated -- the doc now uses the actual custom map dispatch table names (preprocess_map_update_element / preprocess_map_delete_element / postprocess_map_find_element) and clarifies that the eBPF program does **not** call pf_map_update_elem directly for the initial pend insertion. Insertion of the pend-context entry happens inside the extension helper pf_pend_operation(), which calls into ebpfcore via the (still-to-be-added) extension-initiated kernel-mode map CRUD API.

This provides a data communication mechanism between netebpfext (which
implements pend/complete semantics via the layer-specific WFP async APIs)
and the async orchestrator (which reacts to the pend
and issues a verdict once finished).

> **Note:** This design requires several ebpfcore changes: a new
> custom map type enum, full CRUD support for custom map operations
> (from both user mode and kernel mode), and namespace isolation.
> See [ebpfcore platform requirements](#ebpfcore-platform-requirements)
> for details.

### Extension helper functions

The extension exposes one helper function:

> - **`net_ebpf_ext_pend_operation()`** -- called by the eBPF program to

Reviewer: I don't think we should hard code a driver name into a function name, since the function could change drivers over time, or the driver could be renamed.

Author: Renamed 
et_ebpf_ext_pend_operation() to pf_pend_operation() throughout the doc to drop the driver-specific prefix, matching the convention of other pf_* helpers.

// The extension populates this via net_ebpf_ext_pend_operation() and returns it to the caller.
// Versioned using the standard ebpf_extension_header_t pattern (see ebpf_windows.h).
typedef struct _net_ebpf_ext_pend_key {
    ebpf_extension_header_t header;     // Version/size header for forward compatibility
    uint64_t pend_id;                   // Monotonic counter generated by the extension
} net_ebpf_ext_pend_key_t;
```

#### Map value
The map value has a **minimum prefix** defined by the extension: a
single `action` field that the extension reads to distinguish a new
PEND insertion from a COMPLETE update (PERMIT/BLOCK). Callers may
declare a larger value type with additional fields after this prefix --
the extension only accesses the prefix. The extension also appends its
own internal tracking fields (WFP layer ID, lifecycle state) after
the caller's value using the extension-controlled value size feature --
these are not visible to callers on lookups.

```c
typedef enum _net_ebpf_ext_pend_action {
    NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_ACTION_PENDING = 0,   // Operation is pended, awaiting orchestrator decision
    NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_ACTION_PERMIT = 1,    // Orchestrator verdict: permit

>     NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_ACTION_BLOCK = 2,     // Orchestrator verdict: block

Reviewer: ebpf_nethooks.h defines:
```
ebpf_nethooks.h:    BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PROCEED_SOFT,
ebpf_nethooks.h:    BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PROCEED_HARD
ebpf_nethooks.h: * @retval BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PROCEED_SOFT Allow the socket operation. Maps to a soft permit in WFP.
ebpf_nethooks.h: * @retval BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PROCEED_HARD Allow the socket operation. Maps to a hard permit in WFP.
```

Should the PERMIT or BLOCK support both hard and soft?

Author: Yes -- updated the verdict enum to match bpf_sock_addr_verdict_t semantics: NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_ACTION_PERMIT_SOFT (soft permit, other filters can still BLOCK), NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_ACTION_PERMIT_HARD (hard permit, overrides remaining filters at this layer), and NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_ACTION_BLOCK (maps to hard block, matching BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_REJECT). Sequence diagrams and callback validation lists were updated accordingly.

value.orchestrator_context = /* orchestrator-defined identifier */;
value.timestamp = bpf_ktime_get_boot_ns();

int err = net_ebpf_ext_pend_operation(&pend_map, &value, sizeof(value), &opaque_key, sizeof(opaque_key));
if (err != 0) {
    // pend() failed (e.g., FwpsPendOperation returned an error).
    // The map entry has been rolled back; return a non-PEND verdict.
    return DEFAULT_VERDICT;
}

// pend() succeeded -- the WFP operation is now pended and the
// opaque key is valid. Notify the async orchestrator about the
// pended operation. This is orchestrator-specific -- could be a
// BTF-resolved function call, a write to a shared map (perf event
// array, ring buffer), or any other mechanism. The orchestrator
// needs the opaque_key to issue the COMPLETE later.
int notify_result = notify_orchestrator(&opaque_key, /* ... */);
if (notify_result != 0) {
    // Notification failed -- return non-PEND verdict.
    // netebpfext detects this and synthesizes the COMPLETE path
    // (queues a threaded DPC on the recorded classifyfn_cpu to
    // call FwpsCompleteOperation after classifyFn unwinds).
    return BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_REJECT;
}

return BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PEND;

> ```

Author: Same as the earlier thread on this -- BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PEND is a new verdict added by this proposal. The example now flags this explicitly with an inline comment, and adding it to bpf_nethooks.h (alongside _PROCEED_SOFT/_PROCEED_HARD/_REJECT) is called out in the work breakdown.

          so there is no client-visible state to clean up.
    2. After `pend()` returns success, the program notifies the
       async orchestrator about the pended operation (using an
       orchestrator-specific mechanism -- see
       [Async orchestrator integration guide](#async-orchestrator-integration-guide)),
       passing the opaque key so the async orchestrator can issue a
       COMPLETE later.
        - This notification must be synchronous so the eBPF program
          can handle failure inline (by returning a non-PEND verdict).
        - **If notification fails:** The eBPF program returns a
          non-PEND verdict (e.g., BLOCK). netebpfext detects that the
          program returned a non-PEND verdict after a successful
          `pend()`, stores the verdict, and synthesizes the COMPLETE
          path -- it queues a threaded DPC on the recorded
          `classifyfn_cpu` to invoke the WFP completion API after
          `classifyFn` has unwound. No explicit cleanup by the
          program is needed.
    3. The eBPF program returns the `BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PEND`
       verdict. netebpfext sees this verdict and the entry remains

>        in the pend map awaiting the orchestrator's COMPLETE. The

Author: BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PEND is intentionally a new verdict introduced by this proposal -- the doc now flags this explicitly at the example (line ~335: `// New verdict added by this proposal -- see ebpf_nethooks.h work item.`) and lists the bpf_nethooks.h addition as part of the work breakdown.

re-invoked to resume evaluation from where it left off. The program may
then return a final verdict (PERMIT/BLOCK) or PEND again for another
round of async processing.

CONTINUE differs from COMPLETE in two key ways:
1. **No map delete**: The async orchestrator calls
   `bpf_map_update_elem` with `action = CONTINUE` but does **not**
   call `bpf_map_delete_elem`. The pend map entry stays alive --
   the completion API is not called, and the WFP operation
   remains pended.
2. **Program re-invocation**: The extension queues a worker thread that
   re-invokes the eBPF program using a saved program context, allowing
   the program to continue its evaluation.

### Saved state for continuation

Two categories of state must be preserved to support CONTINUE:

**a) eBPF program context (saved by the extension):**
At pend time, the extension must save a copy of the eBPF program
context (e.g., `bpf_sock_addr_t`) in the internal tracking state.
The program context is constructed from the WFP classify parameters
(fixed values, metadata, layer data), which are stack-based and only
valid during the original `classifyFn` call -- once the pend API is

> is called and the callback returns, they are gone. The saved program

Author: Fixed in 776961fb -- removed the duplicated 'is'.

orchestrator never learned an opaque key, so there is no
client-visible state to roll back -- the failure is invisible
outside the kernel.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant tcpip as tcpip.sys
    participant ebpfext as netebpfext.sys
    participant bpfprog as eBPF Program

    bpfprog->>ebpfext: net_ebpf_ext_pend_operation(...)
    ebpfext->>ebpfext: Generate key, insert map entry,<br/>record classifyFn CPU
    ebpfext->>tcpip: FwpsPendOperation(completionHandle)
    tcpip-->>ebpfext: Failure

    Note over ebpfext: Pend failed --<br/>roll back map entry,<br/>return error to program

    ebpfext->>ebpfext: Remove map entry
    ebpfext-->>bpfprog: Return negative error code

    Note over bpfprog: pend() failed -- skip notification,<br/>return non-PEND verdict (REJECT/BLOCK)
    bpfprog-->>ebpfext: Return BLOCK verdict (via ebpfcore)
    ebpfext-->>tcpip: Return FWP_ACTION_BLOCK
    Note over ebpfext: No notification was ever sent --<br/>no client-visible state to roll back
```

## Edge case and failure handling

### 1. Stale pended operations (COMPLETE never arrives)

A pended operation may never be completed for various reasons: the

> the async orchestrator crashes, is unavailable, or

Author: Fixed in 776961fb -- removed the duplicated 'the'.

handle is an active WFP resource; long CONTINUE chains hold it
longer.

### DATAGRAM_DATA layer

The DATAGRAM_DATA layer (`FWPM_LAYER_DATAGRAM_DATA_V4/V6`) classifies
individual UDP datagrams using an **ABSORB + reinject** pattern
per-packet. Multiple packets on the same flow may be pending
simultaneously. Because UDP datagrams are self-contained messages, a
single packet usually carries enough data for the eBPF program to
reach a verdict.

#### PEND (both directions)

Inside `net_ebpf_ext_pend_operation()` the helper creates a pend
map entry, clones the NBL via `FwpsAllocateCloneNetBufferList`, and
calls `FwpsPendClassify()` (the DATAGRAM_DATA equivalent of
`FwpsPendOperation()`). Unlike authorization layers, multiple
packets per flow can be outstanding simultaneously (keyed by
distinct pend IDs). The cloned NBL is stored in the pend context.
For **outbound**, the pend context additionally captures
`endpointHandle`, `compartmentId`, and `remoteScopeId` (needed for
`FwpsInjectTransportSendAsync`).

After `pend()` returns success and the program returns PEND, the
classify wrapper returns `FWP_ACTION_BLOCK` with
`FWPS_CLASSIFY_OUT_FLAG_ABSORB` -- WFP silently consumes the

> original packet.

Author: Fixed in 776961fb -- you're right, this contradicted the layer table at the top of the doc. Reframed DATAGRAM_DATA so the helper does not call FwpsPendClassify(); it's an internal deferred-processing record only, with ABSORB+reinject as the completion mechanism. (This change was applied in both this doc and the parallel WESP doc.)

   - Orchestrator restart (leftover entries cleaned up on startup).

## ebpfcore platform requirements

The following changes to ebpfcore are required to support this design:

1. **Custom map type registration**
   - Add the `BPF_MAP_TYPE_NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND` enum value to
     `ebpf_map_type_t` in `ebpf_structs.h`.
2. **Custom map operation callbacks** *(extends existing lookup-only support to full CRUD)*
   - **User-mode callbacks:** Add `process_map_add_element` and
     `process_map_delete_element` callbacks for user-mode operations.
     The COMPLETE path uses `bpf_map_update_elem` to store the verdict
     and `bpf_map_delete_elem` to trigger WFP completion via the
     extension's callbacks.
   - **Extension-initiated operations:** Add support for create, read,
     update, and delete from kernel mode, outside an eBPF helper call.
     Required for: inserting entries with full pend context populated
     (in the `pend()` helper, after a successful WFP pend API call),
     reading entries (in `complete()` and CONTINUE), and deleting
     entries (rollback on `FwpsPendOperation()` failure inside the
     helper, synthesized COMPLETE for non-PEND verdict after `pend()`,

>      post-completion cleanup from the threaded DPC).

Author: Updated the callback names throughout to match the existing custom map provider dispatch table: preprocess_map_update_element, preprocess_map_delete_element, and postprocess_map_find_element. Removed references to a separate process_map_add_element since pf_map_update_elem covers both insert and replace. The doc still calls out the missing piece: extension-initiated kernel-mode CRUD against custom maps (used by netebpfext to insert pend-context entries from inside pf_pend_operation() and to delete on rollback / synthesized COMPLETE / post-completion cleanup).

typedef enum _net_ebpf_ext_pend_lifecycle {
    NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_LIFECYCLE_PENDED = 0,             // pend() helper (incl. WFP pend API) succeeded; awaiting verdict
    NET_EBPF_EXT_PEND_LIFECYCLE_COMPLETION_PENDING = 1, // Verdict received; threaded DPC queued for completion
} net_ebpf_ext_pend_lifecycle_t;

typedef struct _net_ebpf_ext_pend_internal_state {
    uint16_t layer_id;                      // Discriminator for the layer_params union
    net_ebpf_ext_pend_lifecycle_t lifecycle_state;
    uint32_t aggregate_verdict;

    PROCESSOR_NUMBER classifyfn_cpu;        // CPU that ran the original classifyFn;
                                            // target processor for the threaded DPC
                                            // that invokes the WFP completion API.

    ADDRESS_FAMILY address_family;
    COMPARTMENT_ID compartment_id;

    union {
        struct {  // AUTH_CONNECT (outbound) -- FwpsPendOperation path
            HANDLE completion_context;
            PNET_BUFFER_LIST cloned_nbl;
            UINT64 endpoint_handle;
            UINT8 remote_address[16];
            SCOPE_ID remote_scope_id;
            WSACMSGHDR* control_data;

>             ULONG control_data_length;

Author: Good catch. Added an inline comment on control_data clarifying that it is deep-copied into extension-owned storage at pend time, so it remains valid for the duration of the pended operation regardless of when the original classify-time buffer is freed. Fixed in the latest commit.

        ebpfcore-->>orchestrator: Map delete failed
        Note over orchestrator: Complete failed
    end
```

## CONTINUE flow

When the async orchestrator responds with CONTINUE (instead of PERMIT or BLOCK),
the pended operation is not yet decided. Instead, the eBPF program is
re-invoked to resume evaluation from where it left off. The program may
then return a final verdict (PERMIT/BLOCK) or PEND again for another
round of async processing.

CONTINUE differs from COMPLETE in two key ways:
1. **No map delete**: The async orchestrator calls
   `bpf_map_update_elem` with `action = CONTINUE` but does **not**
   call `bpf_map_delete_elem`. The pend map entry stays alive --
   the completion API is not called, and the WFP operation
   remains pended.
2. **Program re-invocation**: The extension queues a worker thread that
   re-invokes the eBPF program using a saved program context, allowing
   the program to continue its evaluation.

### Saved state for continuation

Two categories of state must be preserved to support CONTINUE:

**a) eBPF program context (saved by the extension):**
At pend time, the extension must save a copy of the eBPF program

> context (e.g., `bpf_sock_addr_t`) in the internal tracking state.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure saving only `bpf_sock_addr_t` is enough for CONTINUE on sock_addr hooks. The current implementation's helper / verdict path relies on the enclosing `net_ebpf_sock_addr_t` state as well (`hook_id`, `redirect_context`, `transport_endpoint_handle`, `process_id`, `access_information`, `original_context`, etc.), not just the public `bpf_sock_addr_t`. If the worker-thread reinvocation goes through the normal wrapper, this section should probably define whether those helper semantics are preserved, reconstructed, or intentionally unsupported on CONTINUE.

Author: Updated Saved state for continuation section -- extension saves full helper-visible wrapper (net_ebpf_sock_addr_t including hook_id, redirect_context, transport_endpoint_handle, process_id, access_information, original_context). CONTINUE re-invocation is logical resume; helper semantics preserved.

The program context is constructed from the WFP classify parameters
(fixed values, metadata, layer data), which are stack-based and only
valid during the original `classifyFn` call -- once the pend API
is called and the callback returns, they are gone. The saved program
context allows the extension to re-invoke the program for CONTINUE
without needing the original WFP parameters.

**b) Program evaluation state (saved by the eBPF program):**
The eBPF program needs to store its evaluation resume point -- e.g.,
which rule was being evaluated, which filter node in the tree, any
intermediate results, and the opaque pend key (for re-PEND
notifications). This state is stored by the program in a **separate

> regular hash map** (not the pend map) keyed by an identifier the

Reviewer 2: I think the continuation-key story is underspecified here for layers like DATAGRAM_DATA. This section says the program stores continuation state in a separate hash map keyed by something derived from classify context, with the 5-tuple as the example. But later the doc says DATAGRAM_DATA can have multiple packets on the same flow pending simultaneously, keyed only by distinct pend IDs. A flow/tuple-derived key would collide across concurrent packets on the same 5-tuple, so the CONTINUE design doesn't seem generic enough as written. Do we need the extension to provide a stable per-operation continuation key instead of expecting the program to derive one from context?

Author: Same as WESP-side; keying assumption callout added; per-pend keying for per-packet layers gated on per-layer design when DATAGRAM_DATA lands.

notification until `pend()` returns success, and therefore the
orchestrator cannot learn the key until the WFP operation is already
pended and the per-layer fields (e.g., `completion_context`) are
populated. No `VERDICT_RECEIVED` lifecycle state is needed.

### Race B: in-classifyFn FwpsCompleteOperation drops auth-context refcount 2 -> 1

WFP holds an internal classify-side reference on the auth context
for the duration of the original `classifyFn`. If
`FwpsCompleteOperation()` is invoked while that reference is still
held, the refcount drops `2 -> 1` instead of `2 -> 0`, and the
completion action does not fire until `classifyFn` returns.

This race is closed by **always running `FwpsCompleteOperation()`
from a threaded DPC targeted at the recorded `classifyfn_cpu`**.
A threaded DPC queued targeted at a CPU cannot run until that CPU has
unwound to a point where the threaded-DPC worker can be dispatched --
for `classifyFn`, that point is after `classifyFn` returned to WFP
and WFP's classify-side cleanup released its reference. By the time
the DPC runs, the refcount is exactly 1; `FwpsCompleteOperation()`
drops it to 0 and the completion action fires inline on the DPC
thread.

> > **Load-bearing assumption (validate via stress test).** A threaded

Reviewer 2: This still reads like a major correctness assumption rather than a closed design point. The whole AUTH_* completion story depends on `threaded DPC targeted at classifyfn_cpu cannot run until classifyFn has unwound enough for the refcount / pending-flag issues to be gone`, and the doc explicitly marks that as load-bearing plus stress-test validation required. I think we should either tighten the argument with a stronger contract/reference, or call this out as an open risk rather than presenting the completion path as settled.

Author: Tightened the wording and removed a duplicated callout. Reframed "validate via stress test" as engineering validation of our reimplementation of the DDK `inspect_threadedDPC` pattern, not uncertainty about the underlying mechanism. The open-risk framing for PASSIVE-level `classifyFn` layers (TCP `ALE_AUTH_*`, `CONNECT_REDIRECT`) is captured in the existing "Scope of the proof at PASSIVE-level `classifyFn` layers" callout just above -- pointing there.

Author: Follow-up: the residual race at PASSIVE-level `classifyFn` is now documented with a concrete mitigation plus an explicit ack of what it can't close. New sub-section "Best-effort fence at PASSIVE-level classifyFn" under Race B -- per-entry `KEVENT` signaled as the last statement of the classify wrapper, deferred completion path waits on it before calling `FwpsCompleteOperation()`. This narrows the window from "completion may race with our wrapper" to "completion may race only with WFP-internal post-classify cleanup," but cannot close it without a new WFP API. Flagged as an open dependency on the WFP team to confirm cross-thread `FwpsCompleteOperation()` on a successfully-pended op is safe during WFP's post-classify cleanup. AUTH_CONNECT / AUTH_RECV_ACCEPT layer requirements now point at the fence as required, and a new netebpfext work-breakdown item covers implementation.

- [Identity-aware programs (token / subject context)](#identity-aware-programs-token--subject-context)
- [Per-layer async design](#per-layer-async-design)
  - [AUTH_CONNECT / AUTH_RECV_ACCEPT](#auth_connect--auth_recv_accept)
  - [AUTH_LISTEN](#auth_listen-layer)
  - [RESOURCE_ASSIGNMENT (Bind)](#resource_assignment-bind-layer)
  - [DATAGRAM_DATA](#datagram_data-layer)
  - [STREAM](#stream-layer)
- [Async orchestrator integration guide](#async-orchestrator-integration-guide)
- [ebpfcore platform requirements](#ebpfcore-platform-requirements)
- [netebpfext work breakdown](#netebpfext-work-breakdown)
- [Appendix: Internal state struct](#appendix-internal-state-struct)

## Motivation

Network callout drivers often need to defer a verdict on a connection or
packet while waiting for an asynchronous decision from another component
-- for example, a user-mode policy service or a kernel-mode classification
driver. The Windows Filtering Platform (WFP) provides several async
mechanisms at different layers (`FwpsPendOperation` /
`FwpsCompleteOperation` at ALE authorize layers, `FwpsPendClassify` /
`FwpsCompleteClassify` at resource assignment, ABSORB+reinject at

> datagram, DEFER/OOB at stream), but eBPF programs running through

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Network security applications often need to defer a verdict on a connection or
packet while waiting for an asynchronous decision from another component
-- for example, a policy service. But eBPF programs running through
```

Author: The doc was significantly re-written. Closing this for now, please re-open or provide new feedback if needed.

netebpfext currently have no way to express "pend this operation and
complete it later."

This proposal adds **pend/complete (async processing) support** to
netebpfext, enabling eBPF programs to:
1. **PEND** a network operation -- absorb a connection/packet while an
   external component makes a decision asynchronously.
2. **COMPLETE** the pended operation with a verdict (PERMIT, BLOCK, or
   CONTINUE -- re-invoke the program for continued evaluation; the
   program starts a fresh invocation, not a mid-execution resume).

The design is generic: any async orchestrator (kernel-mode driver, user-mode
service, or both) can integrate with pend/complete by interacting with
eBPF maps and optional BTF-resolved functions. No changes to the
async orchestrator's notification or decision-delivery mechanism are prescribed by
netebpfext itself.

## Requirements

### Functional requirements
1. An eBPF program attached to a supported WFP hook point (see
   [Supported WFP layers](#supported-wfp-layers)) must be able to

>    pend the current network operation and return control to WFP.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. An eBPF program attached to SOCK_ADDR attach points must be able to
   pend the current network operation and return a new verdict type.
```

We must avoid mentioning WFP in the context of the BPF program. The "API" is eBPF hook and not WFP.

Author: This doc was largely re-written. I did try to focus on ebpf hook semantics, though there are still some references to WFP where applicable. Please re-open with specific instances if you find there are areas you'd like addressed.

      [`bpf_pend()` REINVOKE re-entry](#pend-overview)) reuses the
      existing pend (no second `FwpsPendOperation`). Either
      re-entry yields a terminal verdict (proceeds to step 4) or
      the program pends again (returns to the PEND flow).
4. **Terminal-verdict cleanup.** Once a terminal verdict is
   reached (via any path in step 3), netebpfext drives the
   layer-specific WFP completion API, releases the rundown
   reference on `originating_program`, and removes the internal
   pend entry. Per-pend completion occurs exactly-once.

## Edge cases

The pend/complete mechanism has a few notable edge cases that
need explicit handling.

### Notification fails after a successful pend

`bpf_pend()` succeeded (WFP operation is pended, internal pend
entry exists) but the program's notification call to its orchestrator
returned failure. The program MUST return a non-PEND verdict to surface the
failure. netebpfext's classify wrapper detects the dangling pend
entry attached to this classify and synthesizes the same
dispatch the COMPLETE flow would run for `REJECT`: drives the
layer-specific WFP completion and removes the internal pend entry.
The orchestrator never sees this pend.

> ### Stale pends (orchestrator never completes)

Reviewer: Copilot summary of Linux behavior:

eBPF does not provide any mechanism to “pend” or defer a packet for later completion. Once your program returns, the packet must be either passed on, dropped, redirected, or otherwise fully decided on. There is no kernel‑side queue, sleep, or async continuation you can resume later.

Why you cannot pend a packet in eBPF
eBPF programs run under strict constraints:

They must complete synchronously and quickly.

They cannot sleep, block, or yield.

They cannot store an sk_buff/xdp_frame pointer for later use — the verifier forbids it because the lifetime is not guaranteed.

They cannot re‑enter to “finish” a previously paused packet.

This is fundamental to how BPF hooks work: the kernel expects an immediate verdict.

What is possible instead
Below are the three real-world patterns people use when they wish they could pend a packet.

1. Redirect the packet to a userspace queue (AF_XDP / perf buffer / ringbuf)
You can “pend” the packet only by handing it off to userspace and letting userspace decide what to do.

XDP: bpf_redirect_map() → AF_XDP socket

TC: bpf_redirect() → tun/tap/veth

Userspace then processes the packet and reinjects it (e.g., via raw socket, tun, or netlink).

This is the closest thing to “pend and resume,” but the continuation happens in userspace, not BPF.

2. Clone the packet and send a copy elsewhere
You can clone (bpf_clone_redirect) and send a copy to a sidecar process for deeper inspection, but the original packet still must be decided on immediately.

This is useful for IDS/IPS‑style workflows.

3. Use BPF maps to store metadata, not packets
You can store metadata (flow state, decisions, timestamps) in maps and use that to influence future packets.
But you cannot store the packet itself or defer its processing.

Why the kernel doesn’t allow packet deferral
The kernel networking stack is not designed for asynchronous continuation from BPF:

Packet memory may be freed immediately after the hook returns.

The verifier forbids storing pointers to packet data.

Allowing async continuation would require complex lifetime tracking and locking.

BPF programs must be deterministic and non-blocking.

Author: Thanks Dave - I understand that this is not something that Linux may offer, but it is a very common use case for WFP callout drivers on windows today. I know that ebpf-for-windows != WFP and we should not be bringing everything over, however, I think this proposal allows a straightforward async model that simplifies away many WFP specific details.

Reviewer: Can you explain what this proposal can do that the Linux model cannot do (albeit differently)?

Author: Discussed offline in the triage meeting - concerns over safety of program usage was addressed, and a new section was added to document watchdog + limit of pended connections.

   netebpfext asynchronously.
3. The WFP semantics around pend/complete must be fully encapsulated
   in the hook implementation (i.e., no knowledge or consumption of
   any WFP details must leak to the eBPF program or the
   orchestrator).
4. Initial scope is the `BPF_PROG_TYPE_CGROUP_SOCK_ADDR` program
   type, attach types `BPF_CGROUP_INET4_CONNECT`,
   `BPF_CGROUP_INET6_CONNECT`, `BPF_CGROUP_INET4_RECV_ACCEPT`, and
   `BPF_CGROUP_INET6_RECV_ACCEPT`. Pend/complete may be extended to
   additional program / attach types in the future. The general
   paradigm documented here is expected to work for future program
   types, though WFP implementation details within netebpfext may
   differ and will be handled at implementation time.
5. Multiple clients attached to the same hook must each be able to
   pend independently. The pend mechanism itself must not cause
   one client's pend to interfere with another's (shared state
   collisions, lost notifications, dropped completions). Normal
   chain semantics still apply -- an earlier client's terminating
   action can end the chain before a later client runs.

## Design overview

The proposal is split into two sections:

> 1. A `bpf_pend()` helper that lets a program defer its verdict;

Reviewer 4: nit: should this helper function be named `bpf_sock_addr_pend()` so as not to collide with any other program type implementing a similar `pend` feature in future?

Author: Good call -- renamed the helper to `bpf_sock_addr_pend()` throughout the doc. Scoped to sock_addr for now; future program types that grow a similar mechanism can introduce their own program-type-prefixed names.

   (see [COMPLETE overview](#complete-overview) for full
   semantics):
    - `REJECT` -- final verdict = REJECT.
    - `PROCEED_SOFT` / `PROCEED_HARD` -- equivalent to a
      synchronous return of the same verdict from this slot.
    - `REINVOKE` -- re-invoke the pended program.

Two cross-cutting design tenets shape the contract:

- **Program-declared complete map.** The complete map is
  declared by the eBPF program itself (in its `.maps` section),
  not created out-of-band by the orchestrator. Each `bpf_pend()`
  call binds the pend to the specific complete-map instance the
  program passes as an argument.
  See [Complete-map binding](#complete-map-binding).
- **Cross-client validation at complete time.** The pend entry
  records the bound complete map; the preprocess callback
  rejects inserts whose map instance does not match. This
  bounds the blast radius of a leaked pend key to
  denial-of-correlation -- an unrelated client cannot drive a
  completion verdict for someone else's pend.
  See [Cross-client complete attempt](#cross-client-complete-attempt).

## PEND overview

**`bpf_pend()` helper.** A program decides to pend by calling:

```

> int bpf_pend(struct bpf_map *complete_map, pend_key_t *out_key);

Reviewer 4: nit: should `bpf_pend()` helper return `BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PEND` on success?

For example, for `bpf_redirect()` helper:

                     For XDP, the helper returns XDP_REDIRECT on success
                     or XDP_ABORTED on error. For other program types,
                     the values are TC_ACT_REDIRECT on success or
                     TC_ACT_SHOT on error.

Author: Do you have a strong preference here?

In this case, the guidance is that the program still needs to do work after bpf_pend() (i.e send the notification). So I think having bpf_pend() return 0 on success or a clear error code on failure would make sense here.

Reviewer 4: Not a strong preference, was just mentioning precedence of similar helper functions, where BPF program:
1. First invokes a helper function to indicate an action.
2. Returns the action (which the return value of that helper function) when exiting.

Author: I am going to leave it as is. Given that we are allowing for a generalized consumer here, I would also want to leave the flexibility up to the consumer. For example - maybe the bpf program can have a fallback if the pend operation fails - some processing in line, or it can choose the action in that case (perhaps it wants allow, whereas another program wants to block)

> int bpf_pend(struct bpf_map *complete_map, pend_key_t *out_key);

Reviewer 4: nit: should we also include a `uint32_t flags` as a param for any future uses?

Author: Good call -- added `uint32_t flags` to `bpf_sock_addr_pend()`. Reserved for future use; MUST be 0; helper rejects non-zero values so future flags can land without an ABI break. Updated the example callsite in the PEND flow as well.

```

`complete_map` is a pointer to the program-defined complete map
(see [Complete-map binding](#complete-map-binding) below) that the
orchestrator will later use to drive resumption.

The helper returns 0 on success and writes a freshly-generated
pend key to `*out_key`. On failure it returns non-zero and
`*out_key` is left untouched.

> **REINVOKE re-entry.** When the originating program is
> re-invoked via a `REINVOKE` completion and chooses to pend
> again, it calls `bpf_pend()` symmetrically. The helper detects
> (via the internal pend table) that the existing pend entry is
> still alive, reuses it, returns the **original** pend key to
> `*out_key`, and skips a second `FwpsPendOperation()` call.

> > The entry's lifecycle transitions back to `PENDED`. If the

Reviewer 4: If the BPF program can again pend on re-invocation, should we enforce a upper limit (say 32 or 64) in netebpfext on the number of times the same BPF program can pend the same connection / packet? This will ensure a BPF program does not go in an infinite loop of `PEND` and `REINVOKE`.

Author: Good call. Added a REINVOKE iteration cap as a third backstop in the [Program safety](https://github.com/microsoft/ebpf-for-windows/blob/user/maige/pend_proposal/docs/AsyncProcessing.md#program-safety) section, alongside the systemwide pend memory quota and the stale-pend watchdog. netebpfext tracks `reinvoke_count` on the internal pend entry (new field added to `pend_entry_t`) and bumps it on each REINVOKE dispatch. When `bpf_sock_addr_pend()` is called on a re-invoked entry whose counter has reached the cap, the helper fails (non-zero return) and the program falls through to a synchronous verdict; if it nonetheless returns PEND, classify-exit cleanup synthesizes a REJECT. Cap value is a netebpfext internal constant -- sized to allow realistic async chains while well below DoS depth.

preprocess callback receives the per-map context for the map
carrying the insert. It compares (pointer equality) against the
context stored in the matching pend entry. A mismatch is
rejected with `EBPF_ACCESS_DENIED` and the pend entry is left
untouched. This prevents an unrelated eBPF client from driving
completion for a pend it did not originate, even if it somehow
learned the opaque pend key.

[ebpfext-map-context]: ./eBpfExtensions.md#29-helper-functions-that-use-custom-maps

The orchestrator obtains its fd to the program-declared complete
map through standard discovery (looking it up by name on the
loaded program object, or via a pinned path) -- no new mechanism
is introduced.

**Proposed `pend_key` structure.** Strawman:

```c
typedef struct _pend_key {
    ebpf_extension_header_t header;  // standard versioning header
    uint64_t pend_id;                // globally unique among live
                                     // pends; generated by
                                     // netebpfext at pend time
} pend_key_t;
```

**Internal pend state.** When `bpf_pend()` runs, netebpfext records
an entry in a kernel-only hash table keyed by the pend key. The following

> is the proposed structure of the state:

Reviewer 4: Just noting that this means there will be 2 hash tables maintained and completion will require lookup / updates of both hash tables -- one will be the underlying hash table of `complete_map`, and other will be internally maintained by netebpfext to hold the pended requests.

Author: Correct -- two tables, with different roles and ownership: the complete_map is the program-declared, orchestrator-written channel (eBPF-runtime-managed lifecycle, fd-addressable, BPF map type), and the internal pend table is kernel-only state holding the captured WFP/program context that the runtime cannot model. On the complete_map storage question -- the runtime does actually insert the value into the underlying hash table after our `preprocess_map_update_element` callback returns success (see `_update_custom_hash_map_entry` in `ebpf_maps.c`), but the dispatch work item removes the entry immediately as the first step of its work (COMPLETE flow step 3). So the data is stored only very transiently: from preprocess-success until the dispatch work item runs. In practice the in-flight depth is near-zero, and the complete_map does not grow with pending operations. Per-complete cost is one pend-table lookup in the preprocess callback plus the (transient) complete-map insert+delete.

   orchestrator drives a resumption via the complete map.
5. **netebpfext returns from `classifyFn` to WFP.** The classify
   wrapper returns the layer-appropriate action that tells WFP
   the operation has been pended (for example, the absorb-style
   flags used at the ALE layers). Control returns to WFP and the
   thread that initiated the classify; from this point the
   classify is suspended until the complete map flow resumes it.

## COMPLETE overview

**The complete map.** Completion is delivered through a new
custom map type, `BPF_MAP_TYPE_PEND_COMPLETE`, registered by
netebpfext. The map is **declared by the eBPF program** (see
[Complete-map binding](#complete-map-binding)); the orchestrator
obtains an fd to that program-owned map and signals a completion
by inserting an entry. The map is purely an
orchestrator <-> netebpfext channel -- programs neither read nor
write it. Netebpfext registers a
`preprocess_map_update_element` provider callback on the map
type, so each `bpf_map_update_elem` synchronously dispatches
into the extension on the inserting thread.

The complete map type, action enum, and value struct:

```c
// New custom map type registered by netebpfext.

> #define BPF_MAP_TYPE_PEND_COMPLETE  /* next free id */

Reviewer 4: nit: `BPF_MAP_TYPE_SOCK_ADDR_PEND_COMPLETE` ?

Author: Done -- renamed to `BPF_MAP_TYPE_SOCK_ADDR_PEND_COMPLETE`. Pairs with the `bpf_sock_addr_pend()` rename. Scoped to sock_addr for now; future program types that grow a similar mechanism can introduce their own program-type-prefixed names.

with `EBPF_KEY_NOT_FOUND` (see
[COMPLETE overview](#complete-overview)).

Together these two mechanisms ensure that neither misbehaving
programs (pend without bound) nor misbehaving orchestrators
(never drive completion) can indefinitely consume kernel
resources.

## Edge cases

The pend/complete mechanism has a few notable edge cases that
need explicit handling.

### Notification fails after a successful pend

`bpf_pend()` succeeded (WFP operation is pended, internal pend
entry exists) but the program's notification call to its orchestrator
returned failure. The program MUST return a non-PEND verdict to surface the
failure. netebpfext's classify wrapper detects the dangling pend
entry attached to this classify and synthesizes the same
dispatch the COMPLETE flow would run for `REJECT`: drives the
layer-specific WFP completion and removes the internal pend entry.
The orchestrator never sees this pend.

### Duplicate completes

Nothing prevents an orchestrator from inserting the same pend
key into the complete map twice (retry, duplicate notification).
The second insert finds the pend entry already in
`COMPLETION_PENDING` state (or already removed) and is rejected

> with `EBPF_OBJECT_ALREADY_EXISTS` (or `EBPF_KEY_NOT_FOUND` if

Reviewer 4: will ebpfcore return these errors or will netebpfext return these errors?

Author: netebpfext returns them from its `preprocess_map_update_element` callback; the eBPF runtime propagates them synchronously to the orchestrator's `bpf_map_update_elem` call. The COMPLETE flow step 2 already describes this for the validation path; added a one-line clarification at the top of the Edge cases section so it's explicit for the Duplicate completes / Cross-client complete attempt subsections too.

> already removed); WFP completion runs exactly once per pend.

Reviewer 4: nit: another edge case that is possible:

1. BPF program calls `bpf_pend()`. Pend helper succeeds.
2. BPF program notifies pend key to user app
3. BPF program returns BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PEND

Before BPF program does step 3, user mode app triggers pend completion by writing into the map.

Author: Good catch -- added a new edge case subsection [Orchestrator completes before program returns from classifyFn](https://github.com/microsoft/ebpf-for-windows/blob/user/maige/pend_proposal/docs/AsyncProcessing.md#orchestrator-completes-before-program-returns-from-classifyfn). Short version: the race is benign because `bpf_sock_addr_pend()` issues the WFP pend API synchronously before returning, so WFP already knows the op is pended by the time the orchestrator can complete. The preprocess callback runs under the per-entry lock and queues an async dispatch (the netebpfext implementation plan is to use a threaded DPC for this) -- no inline re-entry into the program. The dispatch context drives the WFP completion API or the REINVOKE, and WFP's own serialization handles completion-while-classify-on-stack. The original classify thread's PEND return is independent of all of this.

## Design overview

The proposal has two phases:

1. **PEND** -- the program calls a helper to defer its verdict,
   and netebpfext prepares the internal state needed to drive
   the eventual completion.
2. **COMPLETE** -- the orchestrator inserts an action into a
   program-declared map, and netebpfext resumes (or terminates)
   the operation accordingly. Initial action types:
    - `REJECT` -- final verdict = REJECT.
    - `PROCEED_SOFT` / `PROCEED_HARD` -- equivalent to a
      synchronous return of the same verdict from this slot.
    - `REINVOKE` -- re-invoke the pended program.

## PEND overview

**The `bpf_sock_addr_pend()` helper.** A program decides to pend by calling:

```
int bpf_sock_addr_pend(struct bpf_map *complete_map, pend_key_t *key, uint32_t flags);

typedef struct _pend_key {

>     ebpf_extension_header_t header;  // standard versioning header

Reviewer 4: nit [non-blocking]: we should rename this to something else. This is not really an "extension header" in this case.

There is precedence for renaming / typedef also. The same struct is used for native module data structures, but is typedef'd.

```
typedef ebpf_extension_header_t ebpf_native_module_header_t;
```

Author: I'll leave as (partially to minimize further churn on the PR).

This can be chosen appropriately at the implementation level.

> platform plumbing is required, and the BPF-visible signature
> stays clean.

**New `PEND` verdict.** In addition to invoking `bpf_sock_addr_pend()`, the

> program may return a new verdict `BPF_SOCK_ADDR_VERDICT_PEND`. When this verdict

Reviewer 4: why is it changed from `must` to `may`?

Author: This is because MUST is not factually true here - the ebpf program MAY return any verdict at this point. However, in the case it wants to 'pend' then it MUST return the VERDICT_PEND. In cases where it errors out, and effectively wants to 'cancel' the PEND, it would return inline verdict.

   reference on `originating_program`, and removes the internal
   pend entry. Per-pend completion occurs exactly-once.

## Program safety

A pended operation consumes kernel resources until it is completed.
Two backstops bound the impact pend consumers can have on the system
if they pend without bound or fail to drive completions:

### Systemwide pend quota

> netebpfext enforces a maximum number of simultaneously outstanding

Reviewer: In the meeting, I think we were talking about a max amount of memory (including packet buffers), not a max number of entries.  If you have 1000 tiny packets they're not as bad as 100 gigantic packets.

Author: Addressed - Updated the doc to note memory, not entry limit.
